William Shunn (he/him)
12 Courier Place
Pica’s Font, NY 12012
(212) 555-1212
format@shunn.net
Active member, NYWA

Silvertide
A Novel by Perry Slaughter

about 80,000 words

Slaughter / Silvertide / 1

Prologue
A Silver Tide

Carl McFarland stood beneath a motionless white canopy at
his father’s funeral, one arm around his wife’s waist.

The

western Nevada desert was hot and dry as a kiln--over forty
Celsius just past noon, and him in a black wool suit.
free hand in his pocket.

He put his

Beneath his wadded-up computer he found

the small, cold syringe that could end this whole charade.

Dead

clay fired in the sun, this tool could restore to life.
Pastor Kittridge, his father’s assistant, read from a large
hardcopy Bible beside the open grave, in a voice that carried to
all the crowd:

“‘In the sweat of thy face shalt thou eat bread,

till thou return unto the ground; for out of it wast thou taken:
for dust thou art, and unto dust shalt thou return.’”

Slaughter / Silvertide / 2
Carl felt as if he were breathing hot dust, even in the
shade, but he didn’t sweat.

He probably needed water.

He

watched Pastor Kittridge, in the full glare of the sun, mop his
forehead with a flannel handkerchief.

It was summer solstice,

the longest day of the year.
“Thus spake the Lord unto Adam, our first father,” said the
young pastor, his high, smooth brow clenched against the sun.
sounded less certain when he wasn’t quoting scripture.

He

“Thus he

speaks to us all--even to our dear friend Pastor McFarland, a man
so good we can only give thanks he wasn’t taken home sooner.”
A high cloud veiled the sun, but Carl did not relax his
squint.

There was no man more well-loved in Sun Forge than his

father.

Pastor McFarland had been quick with a kind word, and

always had time to hear the smallest complaint or glad tiding.
He was a friend to everyone, not just his own congregation.

The

hundreds of people spilling down the cemetery lawn, rustling and
broiling in their black clothes, bore testimony to that.
Of course, none of them had lived under the man’s roof, in
his zone of inattention.

But neither had Carl, not for twenty-

three years.
His eyes began to sting.

He tried to clutch Eileen more

tightly to him, but Hillary stirred in her arms and Eileen pulled
away to rock the little girl.

Those six inches of separation

yawned like a chasm.
The syringe in Carl’s pocket burned with cold promise.
blinked several times.

He

It would be so easy to bring the old man

Slaughter / Silvertide / 3
back to life.

Five steps across the cemetery lawn, a snap of the

catch on the casket lid, a swift injection of nanosolution, and
his father would rise again.

Carl would lead him back to the

house on the ridge, and the two of them could sit down for a
companionable beer.

His father could meet Eileen and Hillary.

But Carl’s legs refused to move.
“. . . and thus we prepare to return the earthly remains of
our dear friend and counselor to the dust from whence they came,”
Kittridge was saying, “comforted by the knowledge that what we
loved in Ian McFarland, and what loved us so purely in return,
has not died but lives on, and will one day rise up to be greeted
by his Savior, and will live and walk again amongst us all.”
Carl shook his head.

Whatever constituted his father was

locked inside that casket in an organ slowing decaying to jelly.
There was only one way it would ever live and walk again.
He drew the syringe from his pocket.
Eileen’s veil brushed his ear.
she asked.

“Are you all right, Carl?”

Hillary had snuggled back down into sleep.

I’m forty years old, he thought.
father since high school.
he ever want to see me?

I’ve barely spoken to my

I’ve never visited at all.

Why would

With a sick sense of failing a test, he

slipped the syringe back into his pocket.
“Ian McFarland,” said Kittridge, head bowed, “you will be
sorely missed.”

Almost too quietly for Carl to hear, he

repeated, “Sorely missed.”
The pastor nodded to Carl and moved to the far end of the

Slaughter / Silvertide / 4
grave.

The two men from the funeral home--Benjamin Destry, an

old classmate of Carl’s, and his son Andrew--stepped into the
shade of the canopy.
was watching.

Andrew wore shades.

Carl wondered what he

Benjamin, solemn and damp, handed Carl a matte-

black remote control with a single black button.

“Just press it

when you’re ready,” he murmured, and stepped back.
Carl turned to Eileen.

The concern in her eyes was real,

but the pale hair behind her veil was too like lifeless flesh in
color, and he looked away.

Clustered around them under the

canopy and behind were all the people Carl had known growing up.
Finish this charade and be gone, they seemed to say, as if it
were Carl’s absence and not a failed heart that had put his
father into that casket.

The crowd’s impatience pressed like the

heat of a blast furnace against his back, stifling and violent.
He lurched forward, into the sun.
The Sierra Nevada loomed behind him like an honor guard,
while ahead the desiccated skin of the desert stretched to the
horizon, unbroken but for the verdant thread of the Walker River
and the busy little score that was Highway 208.

The cemetery

nestled in the foothills, where the last of the mountain greenery
broke like surf against the shore of the barrens.
just that side of river, sat the town of Sun Forge.

To his left,
It was

bigger than he recalled, but not by much, still a picturesque
village set amid hilly fields and orchards and sheep meadows.
Still a place too small and inimical to bear.
Lights sparkled here and there on the horizon, stingy

Slaughter / Silvertide / 5
pinches of diamond dust.

Sunlight on distant windshields?

The smell of damp earth brought Carl’s gaze back to the
grave, the bed his father would occupy in a moment, for all time.
Carl wanted to lower his shoulder and rush the casket, hit it
with a tackle that would dump it down the gaping hole like trash
down a chute.
life.

His father was the one who’d ignored him all his

So why did he crave the old man’s forgiveness?

The syringe was a cold weight in his pocket, an anodyne to
the sun’s smelter.

There was still time.

He could do it.

He

could bring his father back.
But then what?

His father would be confused at first, maybe

angry when he learned what Carl had done.

The mourners would

give them no chance to get away and talk.

Picturing the bedlam

made Carl smile, but he would certainly go to jail when the Feds
learned what he’d done.

And what would become of his father, a

reanimated corpse with two days’ worth of brain damage?

He’d be

like a man with Alzheimer’s.
It was the same argument Carl had been through a dozen times
already.

If he really meant to do it, he should have done it

after the viewing the night before, where at least there was some
privacy.

But if he didn’t mean to do it, then why had he risked

stealing the Rapture solution from the lab in the first place and
smuggling it on the suborbital from Boston?
Impulsively he stabbed the remote control.

The casket

lifted smoothly on the six small floater engines set into its
base.

A sullen breeze washed Carl’s ankles.

Guided and

Slaughter / Silvertide / 6
stabilized by infrared sensors, the casket moved into the empty
space over the grave and slowly descended.

The syringe hung

heavy and impotent in Carl’s pocket.
As the casket vanished, Carl sensed a great sigh behind him,
as if the crowd had released its breath.
a prayer of dedication over the grave.

Pastor Kittridge began
Benjamin Destry gently

removed the remote control from Carl’s grasp, replacing it with a
gold-plated spade.

“Throw in the first shovelful now,” said

Benjamin softly, placing a hand on Carl’s elbow.
Carl heard a buzzing in his ears.
to his father was gone.

His last chance to speak

He stared at the mound of dirt on the

far side of the grave, wondering how he was supposed to reach it
with that raw, loamy wound in the soil barring the way.
“Carl?” said Benjamin.
The buzz intensified, joined by a murmur like wind through
scattered paper.

Carl turned his head.

The mourners were

whispering, craning their faces toward the cemetery gates.
Eileen looked at Carl in confusion.

Carl shrugged.

The sound resolved into the hum of a hydrogen motor, moments
before a battered Toyota pickup careened through the gates.

Its

knobby tires clawed the grass as it fishtailed between monuments
and crooked headstones.
scattered.

The truck jerked to a stop as the crowd

Greg Winder--another aged but familiar face--hopped

down from the cab waving his arms.
visored John Deere cap.

His face was pale beneath a

“Ever’body gotta get away!” he cried.

“It’s comin’ from the east!

It’s eatin’ ever’thin’!”

Slaughter / Silvertide / 7
Panicked mourners crowded around him, babbling.

Carl lost

sight of him for several moments, until Greg climbed up into the
bed of the truck.

Huge patches of sweat stained the armpits of

his chambray work shirt.

“I just come up 208 from Yerington,” he

shouted over the crowd.

“It was--good Lord, it was swallerin’

the whole damn town!

Cars, houses, trees, people, ever’thin’.

An’ it’s movin’ this way!
I don’t know.

We gotta head west--Tahoe, Bridgeport,

Maybe clear to the coast!”

Eileen clung tightly to Carl’s arm, clutching Hillary to her
chest.

“What’s he talking about, Carl?” she demanded above the

commotion.

“What’s going on?”

It was as close to hysteria as Carl had ever seen her.

He

could only give his head a little shake as he reached for the
shades in his coat pocket.
doing so.

He noticed he wasn’t the only one

Time and temperature appeared in the upper left corner

of his vision when he put them on, hovering at a comfortable
apparent focal distance.
headlines.

He tapped the right earpiece for

NO FEED, read the display.

Chilled, Carl folded the

shades and put them away again.
He noticed he wasn’t the only one doing so.
Kittridge plowed past Carl and Eileen, shouting for order.
Two dozen people were already past the gates, starting the cars
that crowded the narrow road to town.

“What’s this all about,

Brother Greg?” the pastor called out, hands on his hips.
“There’s a burial service here.

You’re frightening people.”

A short but powerfully built man with gray hair fought his

Slaughter / Silvertide / 8
way to the pastor’s side.

“Yeah, Greg,” he said.

It was Harold

Thomas, whom Carl had known growing up as one of the town’s four
police officers.

“What kind of panic are you trying to start?”

Greg took a deep breath.

“It’s some kinda--I don’t know, a

silver tide, like a huge film of mercury, comin’ outta the
northeast.”

His boots rang on the bed of his truck as he paced.

“I tell you, it swallers whatever it touches, swarmin’ over
things like those ants in South America, and then--I don’t know,
it’s like it dissolves ’em.

That’s all I saw.

This was in

Yerington, and I didn’t stick around askin’ no questions.”
It seemed to Carl that his heart had stopped.
Harold said something else, but the noise of the crowd
swallowed his words.

More people were running for the gates.

A

chorus of car engines and horns clamored from the road beyond.
“We need to leave,” Eileen said, seizing Carl’s hand.
Hillary began to wail and paw at her eyes.
have come here.

“I knew we shouldn’t

Come on, Carl, let’s go!”

But Carl couldn’t move.

He was shivering.

The war between

calm heads and chaos swirled around him like Arctic wind.

He

turned back toward his father’s grave as Eileen tugged at his
arm.

Across the desert, past the shoulder of Sun Forge, he

scanned what he now realized was the unusually heavy traffic on
Highway 208.

Sunfire danced on tiny windshields, but the quality

of the light was altogether different from the unfocused silver
sparkles massing on the horizon.

As Carl watched, the sparkles

coalesced and ran together in a shimmering line, as if a second

Slaughter / Silvertide / 9
dawn were about to break.
“Oh, you must be kidding,” he murmured.

What Greg Winder

had described could only have been one thing, but Carl had
refused to believe it until now.

It was supposed to be safely

contained in Cambridge, yet here it was, or something like it.
“Scorched Earth.”
“What is it, Carl?” cried Eileen.

“What are you talking

about?”
He yanked his arm out of her grip, watching the silver line
thicken and dim and spread.
looking at her.

“Get to the car,” he said, not

“Get it started, get Hillary strapped in, and

get ready to leave.

Go!”

Eileen didn’t hesitate.

Carl heard Hillary’s wail as they

plunged into the crowd, but he couldn’t tear his eyes from the
spreading chromium sea.

So this is what it looks like to an

enemy army, he thought.

This is the terror it was designed to

evoke.
He noticed the gold-plated spade still in his hands, and
hurled it with all his might into the open grave.

It was hard

not to believe the old man had died when he did deliberately, so
his son would be here to see this.

It was Carl’s punishment for

devoting his life to physics and spurning God.
In the inadequate shade of the canopy, Carl turned his back
on the desert, ashamed and angry.
Mourners clogged the cemetery gates, and several were
scaling the modest walls.

Honking cars jammed the road beyond,

Slaughter / Silvertide / 10
where Harold Thomas was doing his best to direct traffic.

Off-

road vehicles tried to skirt the knot on either side, while two
or three dual-passenger skyhoppers bounded away in long, shallow
arcs.

Blocked by the crowd at the gates, Greg Winder’s truck

moved in fits and starts.

Carl couldn’t see Eileen and Hillary,

but the spectacle set gears in motion in his head.
himself grow calm.

He felt

He looked back at the silver film, trying to

gauge its rate of advance.
A firm hand touched his arm.

“I don’t understand this all,

Brother Carl,” said Kittridge, “but don’t you think you’d better
catch up with your family?

The dead can bury their dead.”

Carl turned to the pastor, his father’s successor, confused
for a moment.
actual brother.

In terms of age, Kittridge could have been an
“We’re never going to outrun that stuff,” he

said, jerking his thumb over his shoulder, “not with this kind of
traffic.

There’s probably, what, only fifteen or twenty

skyhoppers in town?

They don’t work well at altitudes much

higher than this anyway.
the airstrip?

Maybe a couple of cropdusters out at

Most of us won’t get away in time.”

The pastor’s eyes had strayed to the gleaming, burgeoning
tide.

“Does that mean we shouldn’t try?” he asked reprovingly.

“‘He that endureth to the end shall be saved.’”
Having scripture quoted at him always made Carl feel
contrary.

“Paul said to work out your own salvation with fear

and trembling.

That’s what I plan to do.”

Pastor Kittridge turned to Carl with eyes hard and hungry as

Slaughter / Silvertide / 11
cemetery marble.

“You know something the rest of us don’t?”

Carl scratched his head and gestured at the nearby town.
“Pastor, did you ever dream of baptizing all of Sun Forge?”
Impatiently the pastor shook his head.

“What does that have

to do with anything?”
“Now’s your chance,” Carl said.

“Water’s the only thing

liable to hold that stuff off.”
“Water?”
“We can probably save the town, but we need to soak down
everything.

And I mean everything.

Come on.”

With a plan in mind Carl felt better.
longer helpless at least.

Not happy, but no

He led the startled pastor at a trot

out from under the canopy and across the lawn, between headstones
bent and yellowed like broken teeth, through the mingled smells
of mulch and dust and, faintly, ozone.

Harold Thomas stood

outside the gates, shades on, shouting instructions to someone
invisible while he continued directing traffic.

To save Sun

Forge and all their lives, they would need Harold’s help.
“I hope you’re happy, Dad,” Carl growled, sensing the future
contracting around him.

He was home again and likely to stay a

long while, if not what remained of his life.

Slaughter / Silvertide / 12

Part I

Chapter 1
A Snowy Dove

Jenna Kemp, mayor of Sun Forge, folded her thinkrag in half
and pushed it away.

She sat back in her chair, staring down the

length of the conference table.

It was morning and she was alone

in the council chamber, which was probably a blessing.

Had

anyone else been present, she couldn’t have hidden her
uneasiness, and uneasiness made her surly and fractious.
The latest harvest figures were in, and C-ration numbers
were down over the previous year.

Heavy snows in winter always

meant slower regrowth in the spring, but even taking that into
account, Jenna foresaw trouble.

There was still enough wheat,

milk, and eggs to supplement the rations, but there might not be
the next year, or the year after.

Slaughter / Silvertide / 13
That was if the harvesters stayed within a kilometer of the
moat, of course.

They could venture farther out into the

barrens, but that required progressively more water.

It might be

all right this year since the snow pack in the mountains was so
high, but what would happen after the next dry winter?

The

choice might come down to gathering food or maintaining the moat,
and that was no choice at all.
Jenna sighed.

The root problem was simple:

exceeding its ideal population.

Sun Forge was

They took more raw materials out

of the barrens in the form of food, clothing, and other supplies
than they put back in waste and dead bodies.

But when things

were going well people didn’t want to hear about birth control,
and those first-aid kits with the condoms in them didn’t show up
very often anyway.

They had no equipment for safe abortions, but

that hardly mattered.

Religiously the town had gone so far

overboard in the past twenty years that mention of the word might
get her thrown out of office, if not over the moat.
Maybe it was time to start encouraging exploration again.
Early on, it seemed every young person in town had wanted to face
the barrens one on one, and half of those who left never came
back.

Jenna had gone out twice herself when she was still full

of juice.

But as the years slipped by, as the satellite news

worsened and it became increasingly clear that no rescue was
coming, as the U.N. quarantine of North America took effect,
these missions had slowly tapered off.
any point.

There didn’t seem to be

No one but Carl McFarland and his little buddy Orrin

Slaughter / Silvertide / 14
Pritchard had traveled more than a kilometer into the barrens in
over a decade.
Elbows on the table, Jenna ran her hands through her curly,
graying hair.

She’d been sixteen when the tide came in; fifty-

six was an age she had never expected to see.

There’d been times

when the town was so close to collapse that another year seemed
too much to hope for, let alone another month.

Every day was a

battle, but at least rescue had seemed possible.
tired and stability her fondest wish.

Now Jenna was

Her dreams of escape from

Sun Forge were long dead.
She pushed her chair back roughly from the conference table.
She didn’t want to deal with problems like this anymore, but if
she didn’t then who would?

The majority of the town’s twenty-

three hundred residents were under forty.
life was like before the tide.

They had no idea what

C-rations and army fatigues were

all they’d ever known for food and clothing, and since few of
them paid attention to the news, their world was no larger than
the harvest zone outside the moat.
didn’t?

Who could do this job if she

Who would do it when she was gone?

The council was

worthless, including her husband Ray, and no one younger seemed
interested in taking over for them.
Cold morning sunlight streamed in through the picture
windows, picking out a century’s nicks and scars on the surface
of the conference table.

Tree branches speckled with tiny new

buds threw their stark shadows into the room.

Jenna pushed the

folded computer into a patch of sunlight to recharge, then

Slaughter / Silvertide / 15
reached into the breast pocket of her camouflaged shirt.

She

took out a tattered holo of her father, Harold Thomas.
Jenna smoothed out the dog-eared, foil-backed picture in
another slanting sunbeam.

Her father’s head and shoulders

appeared, solid and in full color, only faintly blurry, seeming
to extend far deeper than the thickness of the foil.

Jenna had

inherited her mother’s nose, mouth, and hair, but her gray eyes
and stocky build came straight from her father.
tell me if you were here, Dad?” Jenna asked.

“What would you

“What would you

tell me to do?”
Probably not much of anything.

Her father would be in his

nineties if he were still alive--but then again, they might not
be here if her father were still alive.

The day the tide came

in, Harold Thomas had been all for hightailing it out of town.
It was McFarland, the so-called expert, who convinced him to dig
in and fight.

Her father died that same afternoon when an

airborne puff of silver hit him full in the face.

It swarmed

over his head and down his throat, smothering him to death before
anyone could douse him with water.
Jenna had watched it happen.

She still woke up soaked some

nights, her father’s head bright in her mind’s eye, gleaming like
some fearsome liquid robot’s, slowly shrinking, dissolving, as
its gaping mouth opened wide in a silent cry.

Mostly the head

was her father’s, but sometimes it was her own.
If only McFarland hadn’t interfered, the whole family might
have gotten safely to Lake Tahoe, or even to the coast.

Jenna

Slaughter / Silvertide / 16
had never forgiven him for that, and she knew she never would.
Her father’s holo flickered in and out of solidity as a
fluttering of dark shadows eclipsed the sunlight.

Something

tapped at the window--a bird, apparently attracted by its own
reflection.

At first the sun swallowed its color and shape, but

when it settled down on the ledge and furled its wings, Jenna saw
that it was a white dove.
Chills raced up her spine.

She tucked the holo into her

pocket and pushed her chair back slowly, never taking her eyes
from the window.

Her legs trembled as she crossed the room and

cracked the door.

“Jim!

a minute!

Silvia!” she called softly.

“Come here

Quick!”

As Jenna sat down again, she heard the thumping of Jim
Ivie’s crutch.

The door swung open.

“Shh, shh, shh,” Jenna said, waving her hands.
moves.

“No sudden

Don’t scare it away.”

Jim, who ran the resource pool, moved carefully into the
room.

He was about thirty-five, but the freckles scattered

across his nose and cheeks made him look younger.

His square,

handsome face seemed creased in a perpetual smile.

He leaned on

a single homemade wooden crutch.

The left leg of his khaki

fatigues hung pinned shut and empty.

“Don’t scare what away?”

“The bird, the bird,” Jenna said excitedly.
“Oh, wow.”

Jim leaned his crutch against the table and

eased himself into one of the council chairs.
itself on the ledge.

The dove preened

“That’s really pretty, Mayor.

What kind of

Slaughter / Silvertide / 17
bird is it?”
“You don’t recognize it?”
Jim shook his head.
quite.

“Looks kind of like a pigeon, but not

Wasn’t it Glenda Jones used to keep some pigeons on

Lovelock Street?”
Jenna nodded, barely keeping herself in her chair.
birds,” she said.
“What is it?

“But not this one.

“Filthy

Not this one.”

Where did it come from?”

Lord, what a dull man, Jenna thought.

Strong, brave,

dependable, but dull as a cat’s scratching post.

The dove

strutted on the ledge, its chest puffed out as if it were
courting its own reflection.

Jenna pointed at it, trying to

still the shaking in her hand.

“You don’t know anyone in town

who has a bird like that, do you?”
“I didn’t think anyone had birds anymore,” Jim said.
you mean chickens or turkeys.

“’Less

This sure is a pretty one, though.

What kind did you say it was?”
Silvia Gonsalves entered the room.

She was a thick,

matronly woman near fifty, with dark hair pulled back in a severe
bun.

She ran the supply room across the lobby.

took so long, Mayor,” she said.

“I’m sorry I

“I was in the middle of--”

Three steps into the council chamber, Silvia blanched and dropped
to one knee.

“El Espiritu Santo,” she said, crossing herself.

“So you know what it is, too.”
approach the window.

Jenna rose from her chair to

Bright coins of sunlight, reflections from

the silvery sea beyond the moat, flashed between the houses and

Slaughter / Silvertide / 18
trees lining the next street.
bird.

Jenna had to squint to study the

She glanced over her shoulder.

“You recognize it.”

Silvia nodded, an overstuffed olive in her green fatigues.
“I know it from the stained glass window at St. Mark’s, the scene
where John baptizes Jesus.

It is the sign of the Holy Spirit--

the dove.”
“A dove?” Ivie asked, reaching for his crutch.
to be kidding.

“You’ve got

Where in the world would a dove have come from?”

He stood up, trying to peer past Jenna at the miraculous bird.
“My gosh, I’ve never seen one before.

That’s something.”

“Yes, it’s really something,” murmured Jenna.

The bird was

cleanly, brilliantly white, brighter far than the whitewashed
walls of the council chamber.

As a girl Jenna had dreamed of

astronautics--seeing Earth from orbit, living on the Moon or in
the Mars colony, or cataloguing the asteroids.
the same excitement.
know,” she said.

Now she felt much

“There’s another dove in the Bible, you

“It’s the one Noah sent out from the ark to

find dry land.”
Jenna and the others watched the dove in reverent silence,
until, startled by who knew what, it flapped away in a white
flurry.

Copyright © 1993, 1998, 2020 by William Shunn. This work is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution-NonCommercial-NoDerivatives
4.0 International License (https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/). You are free to copy, distribute, and display the work for noncommercial purposes only, so long as you credit the original author and do not alter, transform, or build upon the content and its formatting in
any way. All other rights reserved. Find the definitive version of this work at https://format.ms/novel. Direct all inquiries to format@shunn.net.
(Note that you should not include a copyright notice in your own manuscript submissions.)

